# Axelar cross-chain gateway protocol solidity implementation

## Protocol overview

Axelar is a decentralized interoperability network connecting all blockchains, assets and apps through a universal set of protocols and APIs.
It is built on top off the Cosmos SDK. Users/Applications can use Axelar network to send tokens between any Cosmos and EVM chains. They can also
send arbitrary messages between EVM chains.

Axelar network's decentralized validators confirm events emitted on EVM chains (such as deposit confirmation and message send),
and sign off on commands submitted (by automated services) to the gateway smart contracts (such as minting token, and approving message on the destination).

## Build
###### node version
We recommend using the current Node.js [LTS version](https://nodejs.org/en/about/releases/) for satisfying the hardhat compiler 

Run in your terminal
```bash
npm ci

npm run build

npm run test  # Test with hardhat
```

## Example flows

### Token transfer

1. Setup: A wrapped version of Token `A` is deployed (`AxelarGateway.deployToken()`)
   on each non-native EVM chain as an ERC-20 token (`BurnableMintableCappedERC20.sol`).
2. Given the destination chain and address, Axelar network generates a deposit address (the address where `DepositHandler.sol` is deployed,
   `BurnableMintableCappedERC20.depositAddress()`) on source EVM chain.
3. User sends their token `A` at that address, and the deposit contract locks the token at the gateway (or burns them for wrapped tokens).
4. Axelar network validators confirm the deposit `Transfer` event using their RPC nodes for the source chain (using majority voting).
5. Axelar network prepares a mint command, and validators sign off on it.
6. Signed command is now submitted (via any external relayer) to the gateway contract on destination chain `AxelarGateway.execute()`.
7. Gateway contract authenticates the command, and `mint`'s the specified amount of the wrapped Token `A` to the destination address.

### Token transfer via AxelarDepositService

1. User wants to send wrapped token like WETH from chain A back to the chain B and to be received in native currency like Ether.
2. The un-wrap deposit address is generated by calling `AxelarDepositService.addressForNativeUnwrap()`.
3. The token transfer deposit address for specific transfer is generated by calling `AxelarDepositService.addressForTokenDeposit()` with using the un-wrap address as a destination.
4. User sends the wrapped token to that address on the source chain A.
5. Axelar microservice detects the token transfer to that address and calls `AxelarDepositService.sendTokenDeposit()`.
6. `AxelarDepositService` deploys `DepositReceiver` to that generated address which will call `AxelarGateway.sendToken()`.
7. Axelar network prepares a mint command, and it gets executed on the destination chain gateway.
8. Wrapped token gets minted to the un-wrap address on the destination chain B.
9. Axelar microservice detects the token transfer to the un-wrap address and calls `AxelarDepositService.nativeUnwrap()`.
10. `AxelarDepositService` deploys `DepositReceiver` which will call `IWETH9.withdraw()` and transfer native currency to the recipient address.

### Cross-chain smart contract call

1. Setup:
    1. Destination contract implements the `IAxelarExecutable.sol` interface to receive the message.
    2. If sending a token, source contract needs to call `ERC20.approve()` beforehand to allow the gateway contract
       to transfer the specified `amount` on behalf of the sender/source contract.
2. Smart contract on source chain calls `AxelarGateway.callContractWithToken()` with the destination chain/address, `payload` and token.
3. An external service stores `payload` in a regular database, keyed by the `hash(payload)`, that anyone can query by.
4. Similar to above, Axelar validators confirm the `ContractCallWithToken` event.
5. Axelar network prepares an `AxelarGateway.approveContractCallWithMint()` command, signed by the validators.
6. This is submitted to the gateway contract on the destination chain,
   which records the approval of the `payload hash` and emits the event `ContractCallApprovedWithMint`.
7. Any external relayer service listens to this event on the gateway contract, and calls the `IAxelarExecutable.executeWithToken()`
   on the destination contract, with the `payload` and other data as params.
8. `executeWithToken` of the destination contract verifies that the contract call was indeed approved by calling `AxelarGateway.validateContractCallAndMint()`
   on the gateway contract.
9. As part of this, the gateway contract records that the destination address has validated the approval, to not allow a replay.
10. The destination contract uses the `payload` for it's own application.

### Cross-chain NFT transfer/minter

See this [example](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-local-dev-sample/tree/main/examples/nft-linker) cross-chain NFT application.

## Design Notes

- `AxelarGateway.execute()` takes a signed batched of commands.
  Each command has a corresponding `commandID`. This is guaranteed to be unique from the Axelar network. `execute` intentionally allows retrying
  a `commandID` if the `command` failed to be processed; this is because commands are state dependent, and someone might submit command 2 before command 1 causing it to fail.
- Axelar network supports sending any Cosmos/ERC-20 token to any other Cosmos/EVM chain.
- Supported tokens have 3 different types:
    - `External`: An external ERC-20 token on it's native chain is registered as external, e.g. `USDC` on Ethereum.
    - `InternalBurnableFrom`: Axelar wrapped tokens that are minted by the Axelar network when transferring over the original token, e.g. `axlATOM`, `axlUSDC` on Avalanche.
    - `InternalBurnable`: `v1.0.0` version of Axelar wrapped tokens that used a different deposit address contract, e.g. `UST` (native to Terra) on Avalanche.
      New tokens cannot be of this type, and this is only present for legacy support.
- Deploying gateway contract:
    - Deploy the `AxelarAuthWeighted` contract.
    - Deploy the `TokenDeployer` contract.
    - Deploy the `AxelarGateway` contract with the token deployer address.
    - Deploy the `AxelarGatewayProxy` contract with the implementation contract address (from above) and `setup` params obtained from the current network state.

## Smart Contracts

### Interfaces

#### IAxelarGateway.sol

#### IERC20.sol

#### IERC20BurnFrom.sol

#### IAxelarExecutable.sol

This interface needs to be implemented by the application contract
to receive cross-chain messages. See the
[token swapper example](/contracts/test/gmp/DestinationChainSwapExecutable.sol) for an example.

### Contracts

#### AxelarGatewayProxy.sol

Our gateway contracts implement the proxy pattern to allow upgrades.
Calls are delegated to the implementation contract while using the proxy's storage. 
`setup` function is overridden to be an empty method on the proxy contract to prevent anyone besides the proxy contract 
from calling the implementation's `setup` on the proxy storage.

#### AxelarGateway.sol

The implementation contract that accepts commands signed by Axelar network's validators (see `execute`).
The signature proof verification is performed by `AxelarAuthWeighted` contract.

#### AxelarAuthWeighted.sol

Weighted multisig authentication contract that is used by the gateway.
It accepts a set of operators with corresponding weights. 
To verify the message weights of provided signatures are summed and need to meet the specified threshold

#### AdminMultisigBase.sol

Multisig governance contract. Upgrading the implementation is done via voting on the new implementation address from admin accounts.

#### ERC20.sol

Base ERC20 contract used to deploy wrapped version of tokens on other chains.

#### ERC20Permit.sol

Allow an account to issue a spending permit to another account.

#### MintableCappedERC20.sol

Mintable ERC20 token contract with an optional capped total supply (when `capacity != 0`).
It also allows us the owner of the ERC20 contract to burn tokens for an account (`IERC20BurnFrom`).

#### BurnableMintableCappedERC20.sol

The main token contract that's deployed for Axelar wrapped version of tokens on non-native chains.
This contract allows burning tokens from deposit addresses generated (`depositAddress`) by the Axelar network, where
users send their deposits. `salt` needed to generate the address is provided in a signed burn command
from the Axelar network validators.

#### TokenDeployer.sol

When the Axelar network submits a signed command to deploy a token,
the token deployer contract is called to deploy the `BurnableMintableCappedERC20` token.
This is done to reduce the bytecode size of the gateway contract to allow deploying on EVM chains
with more restrictive gas limits.

#### DepositHandler.sol

The contract deployed at the deposit addresses that allows burning/locking of the tokens
sent by the user. It prevents re-entrancy, and while it's methods are permisionless,
the gateway deploys the deposit handler and burns/locks in the same call (see `_burnToken`).

#### Ownable.sol

Define ownership of a contract and modifiers for permissioned methods.

#### EternalStorage.sol

Storage contract for the proxy.

#### ECDSA.sol

Modified version of OpenZeppelin ECDSA signature authentication check.

#### AxelarDepositService.sol

This service is used to generate deposit addresses for an ERC20 token or native currency transfer.
The third type of deposit address is for unwrapping native currency from a wrapped ECR20 token.

#### AxelarGasService.sol

This contract is used for cross-chain gas payment. 
It accepts payments for covering gas cost on the destination chain.
Gas payment should happen with the same params right before calling `callContract` or `callContractWithToken` on the gateway.

## References

Network resources: https://docs.axelar.dev/resources

Token transfer app: https://satellite.money/

General Message Passing Usage: https://docs.axelar.dev/dev/gmp

Example token transfer flow: https://docs.axelar.dev/dev/cli/axl-to-evm

Deployed contracts: https://docs.axelar.dev/resources/mainnet

EVM module of the Axelar network that prepares commands for the gateway: https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-core/blob/main/x/evm/keeper/msg_server.go
